# Memory Address Register (MAR)

is the CPU register that either stores the memory address from which data will be fetched from the CPU, or the address to which data will be sent and stored.

In other words, MAR holds the memory location of data that needs to be accessed. When reading from memory, data addressed by MAR is fed into the MDR (memory data register) and then used by the CPU. When writing to memory, the CPU writes data from MDR to the memory location whose address is stored in MAR. MAR which is found inside the CPU goes either to the RAM(Random Access Memory) or Cache.

The Memory Address Register is half of a minimal interface between a microprogram and computer storage. The other half is a memory data register.

In general, MAR is a parallel load register that contains the next memory address to be manipulated. For example, the next address to be read or written to. It is a register inside the CPU (or some other device that needs access to the memory contents, such as a Direct Memory Access (DMA) controller, which holds the address of the memory location that needs to be accessed to obtain the data at that address The memory address register will apply its contents to the address bus in accordance with the timing requirements of the memory concerned and is controlled by the CPU or other device (DMA controller mentioned earlier). It is a register inside the CPU (or some other device that needs access to the memory contents, such as a Direct Memory Access (DMA) controller) which holds the address of the memory location that needs to be accessed to obtain the data at that address. The memory address register will apply its contents to the address bus in accordance with the timing requirements of the memory concerned and is controlled by the CPU or other device (DMA controller mentioned earlier).
