- Feature Name: `union`
- Start Date: 2015-12-29
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#1444](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/1444)
- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#32836](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/32836)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Provide native support for C-compatible unions, defined via a new "contextual
keyword" `union`, without breaking any existing code that uses `union` as an
identifier.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Many FFI interfaces include unions.  Rust does not currently have any native
representation for unions, so users of these FFI interfaces must define
multiple structs and transmute between them via `std::mem::transmute`.  The
resulting FFI code must carefully understand platform-specific size and
alignment requirements for structure fields.  Such code has little in common
with how a C client would invoke the same interfaces.

Introducing native syntax for unions makes many FFI interfaces much simpler and
less error-prone to write, simplifying the creation of bindings to native
libraries, and enriching the Rust/Cargo ecosystem.

A native union mechanism would also simplify Rust implementations of
space-efficient or cache-efficient structures relying on value representation,
such as machine-word-sized unions using the least-significant bits of aligned
pointers to distinguish cases.

The syntax proposed here recognizes `union` as though it were a keyword when
used to introduce a union declaration, *without* breaking any existing code
that uses `union` as an identifier.  Experiments by Niko Matsakis demonstrate
that recognizing `union` in this manner works unambiguously with zero conflicts
in the Rust grammar.

To preserve memory safety, accesses to union fields may only occur in unsafe
code.  Commonly, code using unions will provide safe wrappers around unsafe
union field accesses.

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

## Declaring a union type

A union declaration uses the same field declaration syntax as a struct
declaration, except with `union` in place of `struct`.

```rust
union MyUnion {
    f1: u32,
    f2: f32,
}
```

By default, a union uses an unspecified binary layout.  A union declared with
the `#[repr(C)]` attribute will have the same layout as an equivalent C union.

A union must have at least one field; an empty union declaration produces a
syntax error.

## Contextual keyword

Rust normally prevents the use of a keyword as an identifier; for instance, a
declaration `fn struct() {}` will produce an error "expected identifier, found
keyword `struct`".  However, to avoid breaking existing declarations that use
`union` as an identifier, Rust will only recognize `union` as a keyword when
used to introduce a union declaration.  A declaration `fn union() {}` will not
produce such an error.

## Instantiating a union

A union instantiation uses the same syntax as a struct instantiation, except
that it must specify exactly one field:

```rust
let u = MyUnion { f1: 1 };
```

Specifying multiple fields in a union instantiation results in a compiler
error.

Safe code may instantiate a union, as no unsafe behavior can occur until
accessing a field of the union.  Code that wishes to maintain invariants about
the union fields should make the union fields private and provide public
functions that maintain the invariants.

## Reading fields

Unsafe code may read from union fields, using the same dotted syntax as a
struct:

```rust
fn f(u: MyUnion) -> f32 {
    unsafe { u.f2 }
}
```

## Writing fields

Unsafe code may write to fields in a mutable union, using the same syntax as a
struct:

```rust
fn f(u: &mut MyUnion) {
    unsafe {
        u.f1 = 2;
    }
}
```

If a union contains multiple fields of different sizes, assigning to a field
smaller than the entire union must not change the memory of the union outside
that field.

Union fields will normally not implement `Drop`, and by default, declaring a
union with a field type that implements `Drop` will produce a lint warning.
Assigning to a field with a type that implements `Drop` will call `drop()` on
the previous value of that field.  This matches the behavior of `struct` fields
that implement `Drop`.  To avoid this, such as if interpreting the union's
value via that field and dropping it would produce incorrect behavior, Rust
code can assign to the entire union instead of the field.  A union does not
implicitly implement `Drop` even if its field types do.

The lint warning produced when declaring a union field of a type that
implements `Drop` should document this caveat in its explanatory text.

## Pattern matching

Unsafe code may pattern match on union fields, using the same syntax as a
struct, without the requirement to mention every field of the union in a match
or use `..`:

```rust
fn f(u: MyUnion) {
    unsafe {
        match u {
            MyUnion { f1: 10 } => { println!("ten"); }
            MyUnion { f2 } => { println!("{}", f2); }
        }
    }
}
```

Matching a specific value from a union field makes a refutable pattern; naming
a union field without matching a specific value makes an irrefutable pattern.
Both require unsafe code.

Pattern matching may match a union as a field of a larger structure.  In
particular, when using a Rust union to implement a C tagged union via FFI, this
allows matching on the tag and the corresponding field simultaneously:

```rust
#[repr(u32)]
enum Tag { I, F }

#[repr(C)]
union U {
    i: i32,
    f: f32,
}

#[repr(C)]
struct Value {
    tag: Tag,
    u: U,
}

fn is_zero(v: Value) -> bool {
    unsafe {
        match v {
            Value { tag: I, u: U { i: 0 } } => true,
            Value { tag: F, u: U { f: 0.0 } } => true,
            _ => false,
        }
    }
}
```

Note that a pattern match on a union field that has a smaller size than the
entire union must not make any assumptions about the value of the union's
memory outside that field.  For example, if a union contains a `u8` and a
`u32`, matching on the `u8` may not perform a `u32`-sized comparison over the
entire union.

## Borrowing union fields

Unsafe code may borrow a reference to a field of a union; doing so borrows the
entire union, such that any borrow conflicting with a borrow of the union
(including a borrow of another union field or a borrow of a structure
containing the union) will produce an error.

```rust
union U {
    f1: u32,
    f2: f32,
}

#[test]
fn test() {
    let mut u = U { f1: 1 };
    unsafe {
        let b1 = &mut u.f1;
	// let b2 = &mut u.f2; // This would produce an error
        *b1 = 5;
    }
    assert_eq!(unsafe { u.f1 }, 5);
}
```

Simultaneous borrows of multiple fields of a struct contained within a union do
not conflict:

```rust
struct S {
    x: u32,
    y: u32,
}

union U {
    s: S,
    both: u64,
}

#[test]
fn test() {
    let mut u = U { s: S { x: 1, y: 2 } };
    unsafe {
        let bx = &mut u.s.x;
        // let bboth = &mut u.both; // This would fail
        let by = &mut u.s.y;
        *bx = 5;
        *by = 10;
    }
    assert_eq!(unsafe { u.s.x }, 5);
    assert_eq!(unsafe { u.s.y }, 10);
}
```

## Union and field visibility

The `pub` keyword works on the union and on its fields, as with a struct.  The
union and its fields default to private.  Using a private field in a union
instantiation, field access, or pattern match produces an error.

## Uninitialized unions

The compiler should consider a union uninitialized if declared without an
initializer.  However, providing a field during instantiation, or assigning to
a field, should cause the compiler to treat the entire union as initialized.

## Unions and traits

A union may have trait implementations, using the same `impl` syntax as a
struct.

The compiler should provide a lint if a union field has a type that implements
the `Drop` trait.  The explanation for that lint should include an explanation
of the caveat documented in the section "Writing fields".  The compiler should
allow disabling that lint with `#[allow(union_field_drop)]`, for code that
intentionally stores a type with Drop in a union.  The compiler must never
implicitly generate a Drop implementation for the union itself, though Rust
code may explicitly implement Drop for a union type.

## Generic unions

A union may have a generic type, with one or more type parameters or lifetime
parameters.  As with a generic enum, the types within the union must make use
of all the parameters; however, not all fields within the union must use all
parameters.

Type inference works on generic union types.  In some cases, the compiler may
not have enough information to infer the parameters of a generic type, and may
require explicitly specifying them.

## Unions and undefined behavior

Rust code must not use unions to invoke [undefined
behavior](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/reference/behavior-considered-undefined.html).
In particular, Rust code must not use unions to break the pointer aliasing
rules with raw pointers, or access a field containing a primitive type with an
invalid value.

In addition, since a union declared without `#[repr(C)]` uses an unspecified
binary layout, code reading fields of such a union or pattern-matching such a
union must not read from a field other than the one written to.  This includes
pattern-matching a specific value in a union field.

## Union size and alignment

A union declared with `#[repr(C)]` must have the same size and alignment as an
equivalent C union declaration for the target platform.  Typically, a union
would have the maximum size of any of its fields, and the maximum alignment of
any of its fields.  Note that those maximums may come from different fields;
for instance:

```rust
#[repr(C)]
union U {
    f1: u16,
    f2: [u8; 4],
}

#[test]
fn test() {
    assert_eq!(std::mem::size_of<U>(), 4);
    assert_eq!(std::mem::align_of<U>(), 2);
}
```

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

Adding a new type of data structure would increase the complexity of the
language and the compiler implementation, albeit marginally.  However, this
change seems likely to provide a net reduction in the quantity and complexity
of unsafe code.

# Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

Proposals for unions in Rust have a substantial history, with many variants and
alternatives prior to the syntax proposed here with a `union` pseudo-keyword.
Thanks to many people in the Rust community for helping to refine this RFC.

The most obvious path to introducing unions in Rust would introduce `union` as
a new keyword.  However, any introduction of a new keyword will necessarily
break some code that previously compiled, such as code using the keyword as an
identifier.  Making `union` a keyword in the standard way would break the
substantial volume of existing Rust code using `union` for other purposes,
including [multiple functions in the standard
library](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/?search=union).  The approach proposed
here, recognizing `union` to introduce a union declaration without prohibiting
`union` as an identifier, provides the most natural declaration syntax and
avoids breaking any existing code.

Proposals for unions in Rust have extensively explored possible variations on
declaration syntax, including longer keywords (`untagged_union`), built-in
syntax macros (`union!`), compound keywords (`unsafe union`), pragmas
(`#[repr(union)] struct`), and combinations of existing keywords (`unsafe
enum`).

In the absence of a new keyword, since unions represent unsafe, untagged sum
types, and enum represents safe, tagged sum types, Rust could base unions on
enum instead.  The [unsafe enum](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/724)
proposal took this approach, introducing unsafe, untagged enums, identified
with `unsafe enum`; further discussion around that proposal led to the
suggestion of extending it with struct-like field access syntax.  Such a
proposal would similarly eliminate explicit use of `std::mem::transmute`, and
avoid the need to handle platform-specific size and alignment requirements for
fields.

The standard pattern-matching syntax of enums would make field accesses
significantly more verbose than struct-like syntax, and in particular would
typically require more code inside unsafe blocks.  Adding struct-like field
access syntax would avoid that; however, pairing an enum-like definition with
struct-like usage seems confusing for developers.  A declaration using `enum`
leads users to expect enum-like syntax; a new construct distinct from both
`enum` and `struct` avoids leading users to expect any particular syntax or
semantics.  Furthermore, developers used to C unions will expect struct-like
field access for unions.

Since this proposal uses struct-like syntax for declaration, initialization,
pattern matching, and field access, the original version of this RFC used a
pragma modifying the `struct` keyword: `#[repr(union)] struct`.  However, while
the proposed unions match struct syntax, they do not share the semantics of
struct; most notably, unions represent a sum type, while structs represent a
product type.  The new construct `union` avoids the semantics attached to
existing keywords.

In the absence of any native support for unions, developers of existing Rust
code have resorted to either complex platform-specific transmute code, or
complex union-definition macros.  In the latter case, such macros make field
accesses and pattern matching look more cumbersome and less structure-like, and
still require detailed platform-specific knowledge of structure layout and
field sizes.  The implementation and use of such macros provides strong
motivation to seek a better solution, and indeed existing writers and users of
such macros have specifically requested native syntax in Rust.

Finally, to call more attention to reads and writes of union fields, field
access could use a new access operator, rather than the same `.` operator used
for struct fields.  This would make union fields more obvious at the time of
access, rather than making them look syntactically identical to struct fields
despite the semantic difference in storage representation.  However, this does
not seem worth the additional syntactic complexity and divergence from other
languages.  Union field accesses already require unsafe blocks, which calls
attention to them.  Calls to unsafe functions use the same syntax as calls to
safe functions.

Much discussion in the [tracking issue for
unions](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/32836) debated whether
assigning to a union field that implements Drop should drop the previous value
of the field.  This produces potentially surprising behavior if that field
doesn't currently contain a valid value of that type.  However, that behavior
maintains consistency with assignments to struct fields and mutable variables,
which writers of unsafe code must already take into account; the alternative
would add an additional special case for writers of unsafe code.  This does
provide further motivation for the lint for union fields implementing Drop;
code that explicitly overrides that lint will need to take this into account.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved]: #unresolved-questions

Can the borrow checker support the rule that "simultaneous borrows of multiple
fields of a struct contained within a union do not conflict"?  If not, omitting
that rule would only marginally increase the verbosity of such code, by
requiring an explicit borrow of the entire struct first.

Can a pattern match match multiple fields of a union at once?  For rationale,
consider a union using the low bits of an aligned pointer as a tag; a pattern
match may match the tag using one field and a value identified by that tag
using another field.  However, if this complicates the implementation, omitting
it would not significantly complicate code using unions.

C APIs using unions often also make use of anonymous unions and anonymous
structs.  For instance, a union may contain anonymous structs to define
non-overlapping fields, and a struct may contain an anonymous union to define
overlapping fields.  This RFC does not define anonymous unions or structs, but
a subsequent RFC may wish to do so.

# Edit History

- This RFC was amended in https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/1663/
  to clarify the behavior when an individual field whose type
  implements `Drop`.
