# core
https://doc.rust-lang.org/core/index.html

Crate `core` 1.6.0

The Rust Core Library  
is the dependency-free foundation of The Rust Standard Library.
It is the *portable glue between the language and its libraries*, 
defining the intrinsic and primitive building blocks of all Rust code.
It links to no upstream libraries, no system libraries, and no libc.
Strictly, there are some symbols which are needed but they aren't always necessary.

The core library is *minimal*:  
it isn't even aware of heap allocation, concurrency or I/O.
These things require platform integration, and this library is platform-agnostic.



## Using the core library

Please note that all of these details are currently not considered stable.
This library is built on the assumption of a few existing symbols:

`memcpy, memcmp, memset`
These are core memory routines which are often generated by LLVM. Additionally, 
this library can make explicit calls to these functions. Their signatures are 
the same as found in C. These functions are often provided by the system libc, 
but can also be provided by the rlibc crate.

`rust_begin_panic()`
This function takes 4 arguments:
- a `fmt::Arguments`
- a `&'static str`, and 
- two `u32`
These 4 args dictate the panic message, the file at which panic was invoked,
and the line and column inside the file. It is up to consumers of this core lib
to define this panic function; it is only required to never return. This requires 
a lang attribute named `panic_fmt`.

`rust_eh_personality`
is used by the failure mechanisms of the compiler. This is often mapped to GCC's 
personality function, but crates which do not trigger a panic can be assured that 
this function is never called. The lang attribute is called eh_personality.